3.1 Single column distributions (#45)
UBC-MDS/exploratory-data-viz: chapters/en/slides/module3/module3_01.Rmd

# Remember to also manually update the YAML title above
```

type: slides

# Visualizing data from one column

Notes:
In the previous modules we have seen how graphical marks in Altair
to create plots
and learn about which visual channels are effective
for displaying data.
Now that you are equipped with this knowledge and can create your own plots,
we will dive deeper into when it is appropriate to use certain charts instead of others.

---

## The movies dataset

```{python}
import pandas as pd

movies = pd.read_csv('movies.csv')
movies
```

Notes:
For this module,
we will study a dataset of movies
containing each movie's
title, runtime, budget, revenue, genre, country of production, and average user rating.

Upon see this table,
there are several questions that might come to mind, e.g.

- Are high budget movies more profitable?
- Do some countries make more movies of certain genres?
- Are some genres rated higher than others?

Before diving into these comparisons,
we want to understand the data for each of the columns in our dataset.

Let's start by looking at the ratings the movies received
and explore the best ways to visualize this data.

---

> ## Visualizing a single column with a point plot along one axis

Reviewer: This is spelled incorrect on the rendered slides deployed by netlify, there it reads: "ReprestnData points from a single variable", not sure why the mismatch...

Author: It probably deployed an earlier commit and didn't update

```{python}
import altair as alt

alt.Chart(movies[:5]).mark_point().encode(
    x='runtime')
```

Notes:

> One of the simplest visualization we could perform
> with a single dataframe column
> is to plot each individual observations
> as a point.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visualizing data distributions are useful in understanding the measurements
of a variable, as doing this allows us to quickly and easily see the range and
frequency of values that occur.

One of the simplest visualizations to understand a 
distribution of a single variable (i.e., a single column from a tidy data frame) 
is to plot each individual observations as a point.

```

we are often more interested in how the data is shaped (or distributed) in general,
rather than looking at individual points.

This type of plot with vertical tick marks along one axis
is so common that it is sometimes referred to by a special name: rugplot.

The visualization grammar of Altair let's us think about it more intuitively
by composing it with a mark and a single encoding,
instead of remembering a specific name.

---

## Thinner marks also saturate for large data sets

```{python}
alt.Chart(movies).mark_tick().encode(
    x='runtime')
```

Notes:
However,
when we increase the number of observations even further (to about 500)
it becomes difficult to tell exactly how the data distribution looks,
even with these thin marks.

---

## Using histograms to visualize distributions avoids saturation issues

```{python}
alt.Chart(movies).mark_bar().encode(
    alt.X('runtime', bin=alt.Bin(maxbins=30)),
    y='count()')
```

Notes:
Instead of visualizing each individual observation,
we can use the histograms we learnt about in last module,
where we divide one axis into groups (or "bins")
and represent the count of observations in each group with bar.

In this plot,

> we can directly see that most movies are around 100 min in length.

Reviewer: Add comments on range of the data - what is the minimum and maximum movie length. This is something visualizing distributions lets us know. Also, what about the shape? Are the values uniformly distributed? Or do most values fall in one peak in the middle? Also say why you can say that most movies are around 100 min in length (because there is a single peak, meaning most values in the data set fall there, and that peak is centered around 100).

Then take a breath and start discussing multiple distributions.

But from our experience,
we know that factors such as genre and production year,
can influence movie length.

How can we separate the data based on other columns in the dataset
and compare multiple distributions?

---

## Comparing multiple distributions via faceting

```{python}
(alt.Chart(movies).mark_bar().encode(
    alt.X('runtime', bin=alt.Bin(maxbins=30)),
    y='count()')
 .facet('country'))
```

Notes:
Let's start by comparing the movie length broken down per country.
Here we use faceting which we learnt about in the last module,
to create one histogram per country.

You can see that this dataset only contains movies made in the UK or the US.
It does seem like the distribution of movies is pretty equal between the two countries,

> but it is a bit hard to see because there are so many more movies made in the US.

Reviewer: I don't know if I agree. The shape looks flatter (because of the binning), so maybe I would say here that the range and the centre looks similar, but maybe the shape is different, its hard to tell because there are so many more movies in the US...

Author: Yes, the main point I want to get across that it is hard to tell and that we can scale them to make it easier to compare

---

## Comparing multiple distributions via faceting with independent y-axes

```{python}
(alt.Chart(movies).mark_bar().encode(
    alt.X('runtime', bin=alt.Bin(maxbins=30)),
    y='count()')
 .facet('country')
 .resolve_scale(y='independent'))
```

Notes:
By default when faceting,
the y-axis is the same for all the subplots.
This is often the most suitable choice,
because it gives us an idea of both the shape of the distribution
and the total number of observations.

If we want to drill down and compare the distribution shape more closely
regardless of the number of observations
we could define the y-axes to be independent for each subplot,
instead of linked to the same axis range.

Now we can see that the distributions might be a bit different,
it looks like the UK one is slightly bimodal (it has two peaks),

> whereas the US one is unimodal (it has one peak).

Reviewer: These distributions do not look meaningfully different to me. The bimodalness you are commenting on is an artifact of the binning and low number of observations in the UK data. My conclusion would be that they are fairly similiar, maybe I would play with the binning on another slide to drive this point home to the learners (say bins of 15 or 10).

Author: Ok will look into this. Would be a good idea to play with binning either way

We could explore that data further to find out why this is,
e.g. maybe the genre is more related to movie length
and the UK movies in this dataset are of different genres than the US ones?

---

> ## Comparing multiple distributions grouped by two variables

Reviewer: Is there another country in the data set you could compare? What about China or India? They produce a lot of movies? Which might show more differences to the US movies? Otherwise, I think we need to temper our conclusions on how different these distributions are, as again, I would not support the claim that these differences are meaningful.

Author: I rephrased to say that we can't claim that these differences are meaningful without more data and more plots with different bin sizes. There is unfortunately even fewer movies from other countries in the original dataset and I think none from the two you mentioned. It would be interesting, but I don't think we have time to find that data now.

```{python}
(alt.Chart(movies).mark_bar().encode(
    alt.X('runtime', bin=alt.Bin(maxbins=30)),
    y='count()',
    color='genre')
 .facet('country')
 .resolve_scale(y='independent'))
```

Notes:
To compare genres and countries in the same plot,
we need to group on the combinations of these two categorical columns.

We can do this by adding color within one of our faceted subplots,
so let's color each facet by genre.

We can get a rough indication of the genre differences from this plot,
but as we have mention previously,
it is not ideal to be comparing marks with different baselines.

Let's unstack the bars to be able to easier compare the histograms.

---

> ## Layering bars instead of stacking them can make distributions easier to compare

Reviewer: I think the slide title does not go well with this viz. I find it very difficult to actually see these distributions with this plot... A density plot would probably be better, as would a ridge plot. I would actually use this plot to motivate those two other options...

Author: Isn't this clear from the text where I say the same thing as your comment? I can add "sometimes" to the title and "(density plots)" after "smooth histograms"?

Author: I will take out this since it is covered in the previoous modeule
